The WAP7 (Wide/broad Gauge AC Electric Passenger, Class 7) is a three-phase AC electric passenger locomotive developed by the Chittaranjan Locomotive Works. It is the most powerful passenger locomotive in the Indian Railways' fleet. It is a passenger variant of the WAG9 freight locomotive with a modified gear ratio to pull lighter loads at higher speeds. It is capable of hauling 24 coach trains at speeds ranging 110–140 km/h (68–87 mph), depending on the MPS (Maximum Permissible Speed) of the sector, and is now largely used by Northern Railways (NR), South Central Railway (SCR), Central Railways (CR), South East Central Railway Zone (SECR), South Eastern Railways (SER), West Central Railways (WCR), Eastern Railways (ER), Western Railway zone (WR), North Central Railway zone (NCR), South Western Railway (SWR) Southern railways (SR) etc among other zones. As of May 2020, there are 1051 locomotives in service, all of which are fitted with H-type transition couplers which are compatible with both screw coupling and centre-buffer coupling. In February 2017, Diesel Locomotive Works built their first WAP7 class locomotive.
With a maximum speed rating of 140 km/h (87 mph) the WAP-7 has the highest acceleration figures while hauling mail/express trains. The WAP7 can also haul loads of 24-26 passenger coaches (1430–1550 t or 1410–1530 long tons or 1580–1710 short tons at 130 km/h or 81 mph). It is the most successful passenger locomotive on the Indian Railways roster after the WAP4. It was initially used to haul premium train services like the Rajdhani Express, Shatabdi Express and the Duronto Express. As more locomotives were rolled out, the WAP 7 became the official link of several state trains like the Telangana Express, Kerala Express, Paschim Express, Purushottam express, Vikramshila express, Poorva express,Karnataka express and among others. The locomotives have been used as a regular link for many of the Garib Rath express and many Humsafar express services and eventually extended to a significant number of AC Express and Mail/Superfast Express services like Jaipur Superfast Express, Thiruvananthapuram Mail, Mangalore Mail, Bangalore Mail, Sewagram express and so on. It is soon to be the most commonly used passenger locomotive. Upgrades are underway to increase power output and maximum speed. The First High Speed version WAP-7 HS loco ( loco no 30750) was launched on 28 February 2019 capable of attaining 160 km/h with overall reduction in weight by 14 tons.
30333 WAP7 locomotive of RPM (Royapuram) shed at Mysuru, Karnataka.
The WAP7 locomotive can deliver 6125 hp (4567 kW) continuously, with regenerative braking being one of its salient features. Regenerative braking is deployed on down gradients conserving energy to the tune of 30-35 percent. It has an inbuilt microprocessor based fault diagnostic system to make troubleshooting easier.
A main feature of some locomotives of this class is that they eliminate the need to have separate End on Generation (EOG) sets or DG (Diesel Generator) sets for supplying power to the train resulting in significant savings on maintenance and running costs. This technology, called HOG or "Head On Generation", transfers electric power from the loco's pantograph to the coaches instead of EOG where a power car equipped with diesel generator capable of generating adequate power of 3-phase 50 Hz 415 V / 750 V AC (called 'head-end power') is provided at either end of the train rake to supply power.